                
            Simple C-Subset (or C-like language) Compiler (SCC)


1. INTRODUCTION

    Simple C-Subset Compiler is my final project for my bachelor degree.
    It translates source programs written in a subset of the C language into
    Intel i386 assembly language, which will be then passed on to an assembler
    in order to generate executable files.

    The C-subset is simple. There is no support for pointers or structures. The
    compiler only supports the basic C statements, two data types including
    a basic implementation of arrays and strings, in addition to functions.
    There are also several built-in functions for basic IO within the system
    terminal.

    The goal of this project is to provide a simple fully working compiler,
    which can be used to demonstrate how compilers can be implemented in C++.


2. STEPS FOR COMPILING AND RUNNING SCC

    Currently SCC generates code that works on Linux (and OS X sometimes),
    so these are the steps to compile and run SCC on Linux (It was tested on
    Ubuntu Linux):

    - Download the source code (no binaries are provided).
    - Make sure you have gcc, python, and nasm (the assembler) installed.
    - To install GCC in Ubuntu:

        sudo apt-get install build-essential

    - To install nasm in Ubuntu:

        sudo apt-get install nasm

    - To Compile SCC:

        unzip scc
        cd scc
        ./build.py

    The resulted binary for SCC will be residing in the 'build' directory.

    - To compile one of the examples:

        ./build/scc ./tests/fact-rec.c

    Note: If there are no messages that means the example was
    compiled successfully. (In OS X you will probably see a warning
    from the linker, you can ignore it).

    - To run the generated executable:

        ./tests/fact-rec

    Notes:

    - The compiler only accepts one source file.
    - The compiler will generate 3 files. For example, if you compile fact-rec.c
      you will get:
    - fact-rec.intermediate: contains the intermediate code (3-address
      code assembly-like language)
    - fact-rec.s: contains the Intel i386 assembler code.
    - fact-rec: the executable file
    - You will see a fourth file, fact-rec.o, which is the object code file
      needed before linking. You can delete this one.
    - The directory scc/examples/ contains some code examples to test with SCC.


3. IMPLEMENTATION

    The original compiler was written in C#. This is a port of the original work
    to C++.

    The compiler supports compiling and linking in Linux and OS X binary
    formats, ELF and MACHO respectively. For now the generated assembly code
    works perfectly in Linux. In OS X, there are some problems, and programs
    might seg-fault, because of the strict ABI (Application Binary Interface)
    requirements in OS X. For instance, the stack should be aligned in a
    specific way in order to be able to call functions from dynamically linked
    libraries, such as glibc, which programs compiled by SCC are linked to.

    Both scanner and parser are hand-written (no lexer or parser generators were
    used). The parser is a traditional recursive-descent parser.

    The front-end (lex and parser) is a single pass, and generates intermediate
    code immediately, and the back-end (code generator) is single pass as well,
    which takes the intermediate code and translates it into the equivalent
    instructions of the i386 assembly. It was written this way so it would be
    possible to add an optimization phase to one or both of the two passes later
    on.

    The resulting assembly code is assembled using the nasm assembler and is
    linked using the linker included with the GCC tool-chain. Both are required
    to compile the source code automatically. The final executable file is
    linked to the C runtime library and glibc.

3.1 NOTE

    In case you encounter bugs and strange behavior either in the compilation
    process itself, in the generated intermediate or assembler code, or in
    executable programs, please report what you find to me. However, I do not
    plan on keeping fixing bugs, but you are more than welcome to inform me
    about anything you find. You can send me patches if you want. I can be
    reached at (mohannad.harthi (at) gmail.com).

4. THE C SUBSET (OR THE C-LIKE LANGUAGE)

    The compiler can compile a subset of the C language, which is described
    below:

4.1. DATA TYPES
  
    The subset supports two data types:

    1. int: 32-bit signed integer.
    2. char: 8-bit unsigned integer.

    And only Static arrays are supported.

    In the initial implementation, arrays were not implemented as pointers. If
    you pass an array to a function, the first element will be passed instead,
    which obviously is not the correct behavior. Now that has changed, so you
    can pass arrays to functions. Internally, arrays are passed as pointers, so
    any modifications to the arrays will affect the array in the caller function
    as well. Also, if you exceed the length of the array, the stack of the
    caller will be corrupted.

    Local variables in each scope should be declared at the beginning of blocks
    before any other statements, just like the good old C89.

4.2 LITERALS
  
    - Integers: e.g., 2343, -323 
    - Strings (as char arrays): e.g., "Hi, \r\n My name is Mohannad \t"
    - Characters: e.g., 'a', '\n'
  

4.3 EXPRESSIONS
  
    These are the only operators supported in expressions:
    
      +, -, post ++ and --,  *, /, %, <, <=, >, >=, ==, ||, &&
    
    Short circuits are not supported in boolean expressions.

4.4 STATEMENTS
  
    - if-else statement.
    - switch statement.
    - while statement.
    - do-while statement.
    - for statement. (Statement lists are not supported)
    - break and continue statements.

4.5 FUNCTIONS
  
    There are several built-in functions for basic IO, which are described
    below:

    - printStr(char str[]); printStr("string");
    - printChar(char c);
    - printInt(int n);
    - readStr(char buffer[], int bufferSize);
    - readInt(int n)
                    
    Theses functions are translated into calls to the standard C IO
    functions, such as printf and scanf. Also, these functions are treated as
    keywords and thus are part of the language syntax.

    Yo can define your own functions. However, it is important to know that you
    cannot write forward declarations for functions such as:

    int f(int x);

    So you should be careful about the order in which you define your functions,
    especially when you have too many functions that call each other.

    Additionally, scope is implemented properly (I think). So, visibility, scope,
    and life time of local variables are supposed to work the same way as a
    real C compiler, unless there is something I did not get right. However,
    there is no public scope (global variables), but inside functions, you
    can have nested scopes with as many levels as you want. For example:

    void foo()
    {
      int x, y;
      // Nested block
      {
        int x; // Different x

        if (true)
        {
          int x; // Another x in the if's block
        }
      }
    }

    Lastly, there are many limitations in the language. For instance, there is
    no type checking, and the semantic analysis is limited to simple stuff, like
    matching the number of arguments and paramaeters in function calls.
  

